With this, this project is pretty much finished
but there is another cool thing you can do with Javascript which many people wouldn't expect or which
might be strange when you hear it the first time.
You can also create and run a script with Javascript,
now let me show you how that would work. In app.js, let's go to init,
so to app init
here at the very bottom, this static method and in there, you can create a script dynamically in Javascript.
How would that look like?
Well let's create a new constant for example, some script and we create it with document create element
like we always did but now we create a script element.
Remember, there are script tags in HTML and then of course you can create such a script tag as
well with create element.
So now, some script is in the end a script tag which we created.
Now we can insert some text content here and for example enter alert Hi there to throw an alert, this
is valid Javascript code right.
Now we just need to add it to our document and we can do that by going to document and there in the head
maybe, append our script which is stored in the some script constant.
The result is that when init runs, our script here should be added. Let's save that and reload
and indeed here is my alert and if I save this or click
OK, then we're done and we see the content because if we now inspect the render DOM in the head, indeed
we have that script here,
so you can create and add scripts dynamically. Now for scripts like this, this might be nice but I'm not
sure you really need that because if you just want to execute some script code, you can just write it
like right here, right? It's more interesting if you have some other script file which you only want to
download at a certain point of time,
so where you want to control when the browser loads this script from inside your Javascript code. So
let's say we had another script here, analytics.js where we just send some analytics data.
So for now I'll just console log sending analytics here,
very simple script.
Now if we go to our HTML file and we import this here with script source, then we of course run this
right away.
Of course I can add defer here but that means once the parsing is done, this script executes.
Now maybe you have some app where you only want to run your script after something happens, so for example
after the user click the button or anything like that.
So for that, I'll add a new static method here, start analytics and in there,
I now want to dynamically load that script. For this
we can again add a new script element with document create element script
but now I don't add any text content to it,
instead you can set analytics scripts.source,
you can set the source property just as you can set the source attribute here and this will basically
tell the browser where to find that script.
Then here, you should set up a path as you would do it here in your HTML file, so not seen relative
from the Javascript file but really just as it would be added to the HTML file because that is where
it will be executed in the end,
so that would be assets/scripts/analytics.js.
in this case and then also maybe add the defer attribute or the defer property and set this
to true so that this is only loaded after all HTML parsing has been done.
Now I just need to add this here to my head with document head for example and then append my analytics
script and now whenever we call start analytics, this script should be loaded and executed
and now we could do this of course in the init method here but we could also say we want to do that
whenever one of our buttons here is clicked,
then we just should make sure that we don't add this same script multiple times.
So here to keep it simple for now, I'll just do it when init runs,
so here I'll call this start analytics and
if I now save that and we reload and I open the console, you see sending analytics here.
Now of course this executes right away when the app starts because I call it here in init,
nonetheless this script was actually added dynamically through Javascript and you could have added it
at any point of time, not just when this page loads.
For example you can go to the index.html file and in there at the very bottom, add a footer where we can
add a button where you could say start analytics.
Now of course you typically wouldn't add such a button to your application because most users will probably
not start analytics on their own but it can be useful for us here to prove that this script really only
is added and executed when your Javascript code runs.
So I'll give this an ID, start analytics button and with that ID, we can go back to app.js and then
in here, in init, not do this here,
don't start the script like that but instead, reach out with get element by adding to our button so that
whilst the start analytics btn ID which I assign here and then add an event listener to this button
so that upon a click, we execute this start
analytics.
Now if we save that, you will not see it send analytics when I reload but you'll see it once I click
this button here at the bottom,
now you see that as soon as I press the button. Now the button is a bit strangely positioned here simply because
I'm zoomed in that far and I have given it an absolute positioning at the bottom, if I would zoom out a
bit more,
this looks better but it's not so much about the styling here,
the behavior is the important thing. In the developer tools, you can also go to the network tab and in there,
you see all the files that were loaded.
If I now reload, you'll see everything is loaded but the analytics Javascript file is not one of the
loaded files.
If I click on start analytics though, you see now it's getting downloaded here, super fast of course because
it's a small file but only once I click the button.
So this is pretty neat and this is how you can add and run scripts dynamically from inside Javascript.
Now one important note about adding scripts dynamically like this,
it's a powerful feature but of course you want to do it with care,
you should especially be careful when it comes to dynamically rendering user created scripts because
that opens you up to some attacks here and it is something we'll have a closer look at in the security
section later down in the course, where we talk about attacks like cross-site scripting attacks which
in the end try to inject malicious code into your code.
So if you dynamically add a script, make sure you don't do it based on some user entered content or at
least validate that content and sanitize it before you execute it
but again we'll have a closer look at this topic in the security module.